Transportation planning for any city evolves on the basis of complex interplay 
between urban activity, transport and land use system to result in varied travel patterns. Travel 
pattern can be defined at micro level to include individual journey departure and arrival time, 
journey duration and distances to make way for temporal trip generation and distribution 
from specific area. Trip generation is the first step of four stages of travel forecasting analysis 
mostly followed all over the world. Traditionally, it is focused on the prediction of aggregate 
trip generation by a household rather than the choice of individual activity participation. 
However, spatial and temporal activity domains are equally important in forecasting process 
and strategic urban transportation planning. The present paper attempts to develop Activity 
Based (AB) Temporal Trip Generation Models (ABTGM) for primary activities to cover 
work and educational trips considering fast growing Surat city of Gujarat, India as study area. 
Home interview surveys are carried to provide household and socioeconomic characteristics 
and the activity travel diary information to focus on the activity based tours rather the trips. 

Trip generation is the first step of the fourstep travel forecasting modelling procedure. 
It is a very important step since it sets up 
not only the framework for the subsequent 
forecasting tasks but also the magnitudes 
of zonal trip productions. But, this model 
explicitly ignores the spatial and temporal 
inter-connectivity inherent in household 
travel behavior (Jovicic, 2001; McNally 
and Rindt, 2007). The fundamental theory 
of travel demand, that travel is a demand 
derived from the demand for activity 
participation (Bowman, 1998), is explicitly 
ignored. The main limitations of the FourStage Model can be noted that the focus rest 
on trips for the purposes rather the tours 
with the sequence of activities, there by 
missing spatial and temporal considerations (Ruey, 1997). The approach adopts a holistic 
framework that recognizes the complex 
interactions in activity and travel behaviour. 
Therefore, by predicting which activities are 
performed at particular destinations and 
times, trips and their timing and locations 
are implicitly forecasted in activity based 
model (Bhat and Singh, 2000).