On the one hand, travel time is important in planning and managing urban roads; on the other hand, it is 
important in commuters' route and departure time decisions. Often, mode and route choices and a sense of 
departure time are mainly based on one’s perceived travel time (PTT). This study focuses on modelling 
travellers’ PTT considering socio-economic and trip attributes for an urban corridor, taking Surat as a case 
study. An ANOVA test has been conducted to identify factors governing PTT. Analysis shows that trip 
attributes (e.g., traffic conditions, traffic environment, and travel distance) influence PTT more than 
travellers' socio-economic characteristics (e.g., income, occupation, age, and vehicle ownership). 
Commuters overestimate PTT (min/km) nearly two-fold, and the overestimation decreases with increasing 
trip distance. A PTT Estimation Model has been developed using Fuzzy Logic, considering the epistemic 
uncertainty associated with attributes. The developed model can help inform necessary improvement 
measures to bring travel times to a reasonable level.

Recently, traffic congestion, owing to the significant growth in the vehicular population 
in metropolitan areas, has reached an alarming level. It has resulted in longer, 
unpredictable, and unreliable travel times in most of the urban corridors in India (Verma 
et al., 2021). Therefore, it is becoming increasingly important to study various aspects of 
corridor travel time. Travel time can be interpreted in two terms: measured travel time 
(MTT) and perceived travel time (PTT). The MTT reflects the realistic traffic and road 
situation, whereas the PTT is primarily concerned with the commuters' perception of the 
holistic assessment of the entire corridor. As such, PTT is the outcome of integrating a 
series of stimuli or enroute sequential journey episodes, and it has no straightforward 
relationship to MTT (Fraisse, 1984). Hence, the subjective duration experienced by 
commuters does differ from the actual one (Nicholson and Munakata, 2009; Malichova et al., 2022). Perhaps this is why commuters prefer to consider perceived times in their 
trip planning, such as route and departure time choices. It is also a fact that most 
commuters give weight to the cost based on perceived travel time rather than the actual 
cost of the trip. Hence, travel time perceived by commuters is more relevant than physical 
travel distance (MacEachren, 1980). This is a fact that planners and managers cannot 
overlook PTT when planning for a city’s transport system. Moreover, the perception of 
travel time is a complex phenomenon with an associated degree of uncertainty in 
assessing traffic situations. Such uncertainty can be dealt with by a soft computing 
technique, namely, fuzzy logic (Klir and Yuan, 1996). The objectives of this paper are, 
therefore, to investigate the correlation of commuters’ socio-economic and trip 
characteristics with their PTT and to model commuters’ PTT using fuzzy logic for an 
urban corridor.
The study progresses in four stages. The first stage covers study objectives and study 
area selection, whereas database development for the defined objectives is dealt with in 
the second stage. The focus of the third stage is on the analysis of attributes for their 
influence on PTT, whereas the development of a fuzzy logic model for the estimation of 
perceived travel time is part of the fourth stage. Database development covers PTT and 
MTT characteristics for the selected 12 km-long corridor in Surat, India. The PTT is based 
on the home interviews of the commuters about their trips on the study corridor. In the 
present study, PTT is the travel time sensed by commuters based on their riding 
experience in prevailing traffic conditions, traffic environment, and trip length.
The home interview data is related to both socio-economic attributes and the travel time 
experienced by commuters. The MTT on the study corridor has been collected using VBox probe vehicles. A statistical analysis has been carried out to understand the perceived 
travel time variation and weightage of the attributes. The identified input variables are 
considered in developing the Perceived Travel Time Estimation Model (PTTEM) by 
employing fuzzy logic to address the uncertainty in travellers’ perceptions of attributes.

