Rapid urbanization trends observed in Indian metropolitan cities have resulted in significant growth in travel 
demands and traffic congestion thereby today. To understand the nature of congestion, and its control .A system 
for measuring the severity of traffic congestion is needed. The main objective of the present paper is to develop 
mixed traffic congestion model. Qualitative rating technique has been adopted in five graded linguistic 
variables. The technique is also adopted for noting down road side disturbances of roadside parking, pedestrian 
encroachment, land-use impacts and vendors’ areas. The uncertainty environment does prevail in situation 
perceptions. Therefore fuzzy rule based approach has been adopted in modelling.

Rapid urbanization in cities has resulted in building of pressure on urban infrastructure requirements. Intensity 
and impact has been significant on urban travel and traffic. Along the growth in population, the trip rates, rising 
traffic on road network and vehicular delay and traffic congestion etc. are normal scenario in our metropolitan 
cities. Traffic Congestion is now a serious urban problem. Congestion is one of the major concerns of traffic 
engineers as well as travelers. It occurs whenever traffic demand exceeds road capacity. With traffic bottleneck 
and traffic congestion and many cities and towns of India are suffering from acute form of transport problem.
Many measures have been proposed to represent the status of traffic conditions on arterial roadways in urban 
areas. The debate about what is the most appropriate measure continues. To understand the nature of congestion 
and to control its growth, a system for measuring the severity of traffic congestion is needed. Such a measure 
provides the base for traffic engineers and policy makers to identify problems and determine the effectiveness of 
mitigation strategies. In addition, a consistent and uniform measure will allow comparison of traffic conditions 
at different locations and also over time at the same location so that priorities for improvements can be 
developed, which helps the public to understand the traffic conditions objectively.
The existing methods for the traffic congestion evaluation either calculate traffic delays of all vehicles in the 
system using the traffic flow data, or evaluate the changes of long-term travel times and fuel consumption.
There are number of factors varying on traffic congestion pertaining to road system, traffic conditions, traffic 
impedance and driver’s perceptions of congestion calling for proper analysis. Therefore, it is necessary to 
consider not only from planners angle but also from the travelers’ perceptions about the traffic performance and 
to deal with uncertainty in human judgements. In view of this, an urban arterial road of Surat, a fast growing 
metropolitan city in Gujarat is considered as the study area of the present project so that field surveys can be 
carried, analyzed and an appropriate Urban Corridor Traffic Congestion Model (UCTCM) can be developed to 
evaluate the congestion levels.
