With increase in city size and population in developing country like India, the 
travel demand is increasing very fast which calls for an efficient and effective transit to fulfill 
the demand of travelling public. The transit accessibility is one of the most alarming factors 
of the increased urbanized areas of these cities. The case study presented the spatial transit 
accessibility index modeling with due consideration factors viz. walking distance and walking 
time of the study area. The spatial accessibility is measured on the basis of home interview 
data and as well on GIS base to develop “Accessibility Catchments” through buffering process 
for different accessibility scales of radius of 250m, 350m etc. The catchment areas marked 
provide the scope to identify “Accessibility Thirst Areas”. The research work further addresses 
the development of proposed LOS for both distance and time units. The transit accessibility 
index modeling and proposed LOS of the present study shows the promising results and can 
apply to the same sized urban cities. These findings presented in the paper are case specific 
and can be apply as a base for finding the spatial accessibility status for metropolitan cities.

With increase in city size and population 
in developing country like India, the travel 
demand is increasing very fast which calls for 
an efficient and effective transit to fulfill the 
demand of travelling public. The operational 
planning of the bus system, quality of service 
are the major factors deciding the ridership 
levels for the given demand profile. However 
effective and efficient public transport 
system, it is quite essential to understand 
the accessibility status. Accessibility is 
concerned with the opportunity that an 
individual at a given location possesses to 
participate in a particular activity or set of activities. Accessibility is defined by U.S. 
Department of Environment (1996) as ‘‘the 
ease and convenience of access to spatially 
distributed opportunities with a choice 
of travel.” Accessibility depends on the 
transportation, temporal (time), and spatial 
location constraints which limits the ability 
of individuals to participate in productive 
activities (Odoki et al., 2001). Accessibility 
measurement is one of the critical factors of 
the present urbanized cities. Present research 
study has focused on the spatial accessibility 
of the public transport.
Being the first points of contact between 
the passenger and the transit service, access 
to public transport stops is an important 
factor affecting overall transit trip travel time 
(Foda and Osman, 2010). Many studies on 
public transport have shown that walking 
is the most natural and important mode 
to access public transport (Cervero, 2001; 
Loutzenheiser, 1997; Mitchell and Stokes, 
1982; Stringham, 1982). In planning for 
the provision of bus-based transit service, 
accessing a bus stop is considered to be 
achieved mainly by walking (Foda and 
Osman, 2010). 
Walking accessibility to public transport is 
applied to indicate the quality or performance 
of public transport service (Polzin et al., 
2000; Rudnicki, 1999). Based on an assumed 
average walking speed of about 1.3 m/s, 5 
minutes of walking is considered reasonable 
in urban areas, which are about 400meters 
in terms of walking distance (Levinson, 
1992; Foda and Osman, 2010). Over the 
past decade, many researchers have turned 
to geographical information systems (GIS) 
technology for accessibility analysis (Arentze 
et al., 1994; Geertman and Ritsema Van 
Eck, 1995; Gutiérrez et al., 1998; Juliao, 
1999; Kwan, 1998; O’Sullivan et al., 2000; 
O’Sullivan and Morrall, 1996; Shen, 1998; 
Van Eck and De Jong, 1999). The indexes 
of accessibility that describe the correlation 
between land use patterns and transportation 
systems have been used extensively by 
researchers and policy makers, especially in 
assessing the existing transportation system 
and forecasting its performance (Dong et 
al., 2006).
Present study mainly describes the spatial 
accessibility which is measured on the 
basis of home interview data and as well 
on GIS base to develop Accessibility 
Catchments through buffering process. The 
structure of the paper is as follows. The next section briefly reviews the previous 
literatures studies. A section describing 
the database follows it. Development of 
Transit Accessibility Index (TAI) and 
transit preference analysis are presented 
in the section after that. Modeling of 
transit accessibility with its results and GIS 
Software base with its impact are described 
in the next section. Proposed LOS of the 
transit accessibilities for the study areas are 
mentioned in the second last section. Key 
conclusions are presented in the last section.