Trip distribution finds prime place after trip generation in sequential modelling of travel demand to cover the spatial 
dimensions in a geographical area, to reflect on trip length and frequency. It provides the basis for strategic land use 
and transport infrastructure development both at local and regional levels. Trip distribution problems in the real world 
are quite complex with association of uncertainty in the decision making and therefore calls for an unorthodox 
approach to deal with the concerned issue. Soft computing technique - Fuzzy Logic (FL) is believed to be capable of 
addressing the uncertainty lying in the travellers’ behaviour and has been sought to develop realistic behavioural 
models in the recent years. FL takes into account linguistic variables and is based on simple and logical “IF-THEN” 
rules which closely resemble human thought process. Fuzzy Logic based trip distribution models are developed 
employing Fuzzy C-mean (FCM) clustering, and are compared for their performance with the Genfis based approach, 
where a Sugeno-type Fuzzy Inference System (FIS) is generated using Subtractive clustering. Surat, a fast growing 
metropolitan city in India is considered to realize the study. The models developed here, find applications in strategic 
land-use and transport planning for developing Indian cities.

Four stage modelling process is the commonly employed method for forecasting travel demand, involving phases 
such as trip generation, trip distribution, mode choice and traffic assignment. Trip distribution analysis plays vital role 
as it deals with the destination choice phase. Conventional trip distribution models which has major limitation that the 
input variables need to have crisp values and hence should be measured accurately, which consumes lot of time and 
resources. Moreover, decision of trip maker for choosing a destination involves human approximations which are not 
precisely captured by these conventional models. This can be overcome by using artificial intelligence techniques like 
fuzzy logic for modeling trip distribution. Fuzzy logic try to harness the human knowledge which is often guided by 
approximations by accepting input values in linguistic terms. The fuzzy rule base comprises of several IF-THEN rules 
which closely resemble human knowledge and decision-making. Thus to overcome limitation of traditional model, 
application of fuzzy logic seems to be most appropriate to consider ambiguity, imprecision and vagueness in 
influencing variables. Fuzzy logic model in contrast to the conventional model takes into account highly non-linear 
relationship between input and output variables.
Clustering is the effective tool for natural grouping of data from a large data set, and allows concise representation 
of characteristics of the data. Given a data set, the aim of clustering is to partition it into different groups (clusters) so
that the members in the same group are of similar nature, whereas members of different groups are dissimilar. While
clustering, various similarity measures can be considered, one of the most commonly used is distance between data 
samples. The Fuzzy Inference System (FIS) is a simple way to construct systems models without using complex 
analytical equations. The Fuzzy C-mean algorithm and Subtractive clustering algorithm are implemented to find the 
number and the position of clusters for a set of highly non-linear data. In the present study, different FIS are created 
using Fuzzy C mean clustering as well as Subtractive clustering. Fuzzy C-mean clustering provides a method that 
shows how to group data points that populate some multidimensional space into a specific number of different clusters.
As for subtractive clustering, the radii parameter is changed to obtain different number of clusters. Generally, 
increasing the number of generated cluster yields an improvement in result. For subtractive clustering the radii 
parameters are tuned. This automatically generates the number of clusters. The fuzzy models developed with the help 
of these two clustering techniques are compared here to find out the efficiency of the clustering systems and thereby 
arriving at realistic trip distribution models