Achievement of fast and reliable travel time on urban road 
network is one of the major objectives for a transport planner 
against the enormous growth in vehicle population and urban 
traffic in most of the metropolitan cities in India. Urban arterials or main city corridors are subjected to heavy traffic flow 
resulting in degradation of traffic quality in terms of vehicular delays and increase in travel time. Since the Indian roadway traffic is characterized by heterogeneity with dominance 
of 2Ws (Two wheelers) and 3Ws (Auto rickshaw), travel times 
are varying significantly. With this in background, the present 
paper focuses on identification of travel time attributes such as 
heterogeneous traffic, road side friction and corridor intersections for recurrent traffic condition and to develop an appropriate Corridor Travel Time Estimation Model using Multi-Linear 
Regression (MLR) approach. The model is further subjected to 
sensitivity analysis with reference to identified attributes to realize the impact of the identified attributes on travel time so as to 
suggest certain measures for improvement.

Fast and reliable movement of people and goods is one of 
the key functions of the Arterial and Sub-Arterial roads in 
urban areas (Yang, 2005). Traffic pressure owing to the significant growth in vehicle population on such roads in most 
of the metropolitan cities, particularly in developing countries, 
has reached alarming proportion due to increased economic 
activities resulting in a longer and unreliable travel time. Travel 
time is affected by various attributes besides traffic and physical characteristics of corridors (Lin et al., 2005). Pedestrian 
encroachments and haphazard road side parkings are further 
adding to the congestion level. Travel time variation and longer travel time not only add to the anxiety and stress of the 
commuters but also result in waste of productive time (Ravi 
Shekhar et al., 2012). These attributes vary from place to place 
with time. Keeping this in view, an urban traffic corridor has 
been considered to probe into the major travel time attributes 
for recurrent congestion conditions, so as to develop a suitable 
travel time estimation model. The model finds application in 
urban transportation planning and traffic management apart 
from assessment of corridor traffic performance. The study 
corridor belongs to Surat, the second largest city in the state of 
Gujarat in India as a typical case of corridor travel time studies.